## Part A: Progress Report {.page_break_before}

### Examining bacterial variation with genome graphs

#### Thesis Advisory Committee

- Zamin Iqbal (Supervisor) - EMBL-EBI
- John Marioni (Chair) - EMBL-EBI
- Georg Zeller - EMBL Heidelberg
- Estée Török - University of Cambridge

**Starting Date**: 12/10/2017  
**Qualifying Assessment Date**: 06/07/2018  
**Second TAC Meeting**: 15/10/2019  
**Third TAC Meeting**: 13/10/2020


#### Executive summary

Genomics is now ubiquitous in clinical and public health microbiology, at least in the
developed world. However, many significant challenges remain.
- Bacterial genomes harbour huge amounts of diversity, even within a species, and
  traditional reference-based approaches are problematic.
- Much of the variation in bacteria is fundamentally inaccessible to short reads.
- Long Nanopore reads are noisy, and SNP calling with this data is not properly
  benchmarked or standardised.
- Since *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* (Mtb) infects so many people, there is potential
  for considerable impact for clinical applications.
- There is also much to be gained from a high-quality pan-genome of Mtb as well as a
  detailed map of its enigmatic *pe/ppe* gene repertoire.


These motivations drive the following PhD thesis structure:

1. Develop algorithms and software for variant discovery using bacterial genome graphs,
   building on work of a previous student in the lab (my first paper, second author).
2. Benchmark Nanopore versus Illumina SNP calling, showing our algorithms meet the needs
   of clinical and public health users, validate, and publish (second paper).
3. Improve upon current whole-genome sequencing-based drug resistance prediction for Mtb
   using genome graphs.
4. Curate a high-quality reference pan-genome for Mtb that includes a detailed map of
   the *pe/ppe* genes.

