## Thesis Advisory Committee

- Zamin Iqbal (Supervisor) - EMBL-EBI
- John Marioni (Chair) - EMBL-EBI
- Georg Zeller - EMBL Heidelberg
- Estée Török - University of Cambridge

**Starting Date**: 12/10/2017  
**Qualifying Assessment Date**: 06/07/2018  
**Second TAC Meeting**: 15/10/2019  
**Third TAC Meeting**: 13/10/2020  
**Current Contract Expiry**: 11/04/2021

### Executive summary

#### Progress

- The content of Chapter 1 is effectively finished and a paper covering the work
  (second-author) is in the process of submission. All that remains is to write the
  thesis chapter.
- The major publication from this thesis comprises the work in chapters 2 & 3. I am on
  track to have this paper complete and submitted by the end of quarter 1 2021.
- All results for chapter 2 are close to complete. I have written some of this chapter
  and hope to complete the methods and results by the end of 2020.
- The "start-up" work and method refinement for chapter 3 are mostly complete as they
  are intertwined with chapter 2. I expect to have chapter 3 complete in quarter 1 of
  2021\.

#### Timeline

**Chapter 1**: written by April/May 2021.  
**Chapters 2 & 3**: written by April/May 2021.  
**Chapter 4**: Begin work in February/March 2021 and will likely require 6 months of
work to get it to a stage where I can write a chapter about it. Unlikely to reach
publication stage within my PhD.

---

Taking the progress and timelines outlined above into account, I would like to ask for a
6-month extension from 3.5 (11/04/2021) to 4 years.
