## Part B: Training and career development {.page_break_before}

### Publication Strategy

- The paper covering the work in
  [Chapter 1](./20.partA.md#chapter-1-variant-discovery-in-genome-graphs) is currently
  in preparation - titled *Nucleotide-resolution bacterial pan-genomics with reference
  graphs*. This paper covers the entirety of the `pandora` method. As the bulk of this
  method was produced by a previous PhD student in the lab, Rachel Colquhoun, I will be
  the second author. The work I will have contributed to this paper include the addition
  of the *de novo* variant discovery, and a large amount of the evaluation. We aim to
  submit the paper in October 2020.
- The work that will constitute
  [Chapter 2](./20.partA.md#chapter-2-applications-to-m-tuberculosis-nanopore-variant-calling)
  and
  [Chapter 3](./20.partA.md#chapter-3-applications-to-improving-m-tuberculosis-drug-resistance-prediction)
  will also be contained in a paper, of which I will be the first author. We aim to have
  this work completed and a manuscript submitted by the end of November 2020 - or the
  first quarter of 2021 at the latest.
- The work in
  [Chapter 4](./20.partA.md#chapter-4-construction-of-a-m-tuberculosis-reference-pan-genome)
  is a bit harder to put an approximate date on, but we would hope to have it completed
  sometime in the third quarter of 2021, with myself being the first author.

### List of publications, papers in press, preprints, manuscripts submitted/in preparation to date

In addition to the major "thesis publications" listed [above](#publication-strategy), I
am also involved in the following publications:

- The recent publication of `mykrobe` [@doi:10/ggd835], in which I assisted with the
  improvement of the genotyping model for Nanopore data.
- A preprint [@doi:10.1101/2020.02.06.936302] from a student-led project investigating
  the use of Nanopore sequencing for freshwater monitoring. I did a large part of the
  data analysis for this work.
- Supplementary to the work in
  [Chapter 2](20.partA.md#chapter-2-applications-to-m-tuberculosis-nanopore-variant-calling)
  we also aim to submit a paper that will be a "crowd-sourcing" call for training
  species-specific Nanopore basecalling models. I used the data we have good PacBio
  assemblies for to try and train a Mtb-specific basecalling model, as it has been
  previously shown (in *K. pneumoniae*) [@doi:10.1186/s13059-019-1727-y] that this can
  improve read and consensus accuracy. This attempt did not yield a more accurate model
  than the default, but we think it is important to make this result available and
  challenge others to do the same for their species-of-interest.
- I am third-author on a new manuscript for the workflow management system `snakemake`
  [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bts480]. The manuscript is in the process of being
  submitted to *Nature Communications*. I contributed to this work by co-developing a
  tool called `snakefmt` (<https://github.com/snakemake/snakefmt>) that is used to
  provide automatic formatting of `snakemake` code - improving the readability of
  workflows. Additionally, I also developed and maintain the `snakemake`
  ["profile"][lsf] that configures job submission and status-checking for the LSF
  cluster system.
- I plan to submit an ["Application Note"][app-note] to *Bioinformatics* for `rasusa`
  [@doi:10/d9rz]. This is a tool I wrote in the Rust programming language to randomly
  subsample sequencing reads to a specified coverage.

### Work plan and timeline for thesis submission

I started working on my thesis in April 2020. For the last two months I have been
spending approximately 2 hours a week writing.  
The writing I have done includes:

- The methods section for *de novo* variant discovery in Chapter 1.
- The methods and results for sections in Chapter 2 covering the training of an
  Mtb-specific basecalling model, an assembly method benchmark for the samples we have
  PacBio data for, and the quality control of the data.

I plan to continue writing the results and methods for Chapter 2 and 3 in parallel with
the daily work I am doing. As the work in these chapters will be published together (see
[Publication Strategy](#publication-strategy)) I hope to have completed a well-polished
draft for them both by the end of the year.

As a lot of the work in Chapters 2 and 3 leverage (and improve) the methods in Chapter
1, I will revisit this chapter once the work in these two chapters is complete. By this
point, the `pandora` paper will be submitted, as will the paper for Chapter 2 and 3.
This will allow me to write a "finalised" methods and results section for Chapter 1. As
such, I plan to take some time at the start of next year (2021) to work solely on
getting Chapter 1 to a near-finished state.

Chapter 4 will be approached in a similar manner to Chapters 2 and 3 - writing methods
and results in parallel with the work I am doing. This means I will hope to have this
chapter in a near-complete state, regardless of whether I "finish" the project before
when I need to submit.

Lastly, I will work on the introductory chapter. I prefer to do this once I have a clear
picture of all of the topics touched on in the body of the work.

I plan to submit (pending the six-month extension) my thesis in (INSERT MONTH) 2021.

### List of scientific courses and conferences attended to date and planned for next year

- Applied Bioinformatics and Public Health Microbiology, Hinxton, UK - May 2021
- [TBScience][tbscience] - October 2020 (virtual)
- [Genome Informatics][gi] - September 2020 (virtual)
- CRyPTIC Consortium Annual Meeting, Hyderabad, India - October 2019
- [Computational Pan-genomics workshop][bielefeld], Bielefeld, Germany - October 2019

### List of additional training, teaching and other relevant activities to date

- [Hackseq][hackseq], October 2019 (virtual). I was involved in a project that created
  an automated bioinformatics bug discovery tool called [`hypothesis-bio`][hypo-bio].

### Career development plan

#### Please describe your current long-term career aims (i.e. 3-5 years after PhD).

Within 3-5 years of completing my PhD I hope to be in a postdoctoral position.
Geographically, I will be based in Queensland, Australia with my (soon-to-be) wife. I
would like to continue working on Mtb genomics. Some Mtb-related topics I would like to
pursue would be real-time analysis from a Nanopore device and also method development
for improving our ability to analyse mixed infections. I also have a strong desire to do
research within the reproducible bioinformatics field.

#### Please comment on the types of position you would like to apply to for after the PhD and your expected application timeline?

I have already been in discussions with my Master's supervisor about a job post-PhD. He
recently received funding for a project aimed at implementation, in Papua New Guinea, of
rapid direct-from-sample DNA sequencing approaches to characterise drug resistant
tuberculosis, and evaluation of the accuracy of this approach compared to standard
culture-based approaches. The bioinformatics component of this project is not yet
filled. We are in discussions about the possibility of me joining the project in either
a postdoc or research officer capacity.

There are also a couple of Australian-based postdoctoral fellowships I would like to
apply for within the next year or two:

- Australian Research Council (ARC) [Discovery Early Career Researcher Awards][decra]
  (DECRA). This grant provides focused research support for early career researchers in
  both teaching and research, and research-only positions. The applications for funding
  beginning 2023 closes in October 2021.
- [NHMRC Investigator Grant][nhmrc]: These grants provide the investigator with
  flexibility to pursue important new research directions as they arise and to form
  collaborations as needed, rather than being restricted to the scope of a specific
  research project. This grant has been [postponed][postpone], but applications are
  likely to open in February/March 2021. I will need to begin discussions with a
  university partner in order to be able to apply for this funding.

#### What do you see as your strengths (2-3 skills)?

- Nanopore bioinformatics method development and analysis
- Bacterial variant-calling evaluation
- Software engineering

#### What do you see as your areas for improvement (2-3 areas)?

- Structural organisation of the Mtb genome
- Phylogenetics
- Writing and reviewing academic publications

#### What are your career development priorities until the end of your contract?

- Improve on my understanding of Mtb genomics at the nucleotide level, but also macro
  elements such as the pan-genomic landscape. This skill set will benefit both my PhD
  and my future postdoctoral aspirations to work on Mtb further.
- Reviewing and writing papers will be a valuable set of skills for applying to
  postdoctoral fellowships and is something that can fit into the completion of my PhD
  nicely.

#### What actions will you take to develop these skills?

- Chapters 2, 3, and 4 of my thesis will all dramatically improve upon my understanding
  of Mtb genomics.
- The TBScience conference I am (virtually) attending in October 2020 is another action
  I am taking to increase my Mtb knowledge. It is part of the Union World Conference On
  Lung Health and so will cover a wide range of Mtb topics.
- I am currently reviewing a paper together with Zam to learn how this process works. I
  plan to be involved in other reviewing opportunities before the end of my PhD.
- Aside from writing my thesis, I have at least three publications that I would like to
  first-author before the end of my PhD. The practise of writing and submitting these
  will no doubt help me when it comes time to write a grant proposal for a postdoctoral
  position.
- I have registered for the EMBL "Applying to postdoc positions" workshop (late-October)
  and am also waiting for the next "Grant Writing" workshop to become available.

[app-note]: https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/pages/instructions_for_authors#Types%20of%20Manuscript
[bielefeld]: https://www.uni-bielefeld.de/(en)/ZiF/AG/2019/09-30-Stoye.html
[decra]: https://www.arc.gov.au/grants/discovery-program/discovery-early-career-researcher-award-decra
[gi]: https://coursesandconferences.wellcomegenomecampus.org/our-events/genome-informatics-2020/
[hackseq]: https://www.hackseq.com/hackseq19
[hypo-bio]: https://github.com/IQTLabs/hypothesis-bio
[lsf]: https://github.com/Snakemake-Profiles/lsf
[nhmrc]: https://www.nhmrc.gov.au/funding/find-funding/investigator-grants
[postpone]: https://www.nhmrc.gov.au/about-us/news-centre/changes-nhmrcs-grant-schedule-and-policies-response-covid-19
[tbscience]: https://conf2020.theunion.org/programme/tb-science/

