## Part C: Impact of COVID-19 pandemic {.page_break_before}

Our research lab began working from home full-time on 16/03/2020. My partner, who lives
in Australia, was due to arrive in Cambridge in early April for seven weeks. This trip
had to be cancelled due to Australian border restrictions. The cancellation meant that I
would not be seeing her for an unknown amount of time - having not seen each other since
the beginning of 2020. As such, I organised to travel back to Australia. Trying to
organise international travel at this time ended up being quite disastrous and after 3
flight cancellations, I was due to fly back to Australia on 27/04/2020. In the meantime,
I found it very difficult to stay focused working at home. As I live in college
accommodation, my office and bedroom are one-and-the-same. Adding the stress of trying
to get back to my partner, I would say this was the most unproductive time of my PhD
to-date. The day before my flight to Australia, on 27/04, I started displaying COVID-19
symptoms - fever, lethargy, lack of appetite - and had to isolate for a week. Needless
to say, I did not work for this week and I flew to Australia the following week on
03/05. I was in hotel quarantine for 16 days in Australia, but this was surprisingly
productive from my PhD perspective. However, my first 6 weeks after arriving in
Australia were not as productive as I would have liked as my living arrangement with my
partner was difficult to adjust to accommodate both of our working requirements. In the
end, I started paying (from my predoc budget) to work from a co-working space three days
a week and have additionally bought new home office equipment that has improved my
ability to work from home. From July onwards I would say that my productivity has
returned to pre-pandemic levels. I began meticulously tracking my work hours at the
beginning of the pandemic and I am now doing roughly twice as many hours of productive
work than I was prior to July.

I will remain in Australia until the beginning of January 2021 and continue to work
three days a week from the co-working space - provided my predoc budget does not run
out. Zam and I meet twice a week and I still attend group meetings every week - our lab
will remain remote until January 2021.

Overall, I estimate that COVID-19 has caused me to lose about 6-8 weeks worth of time
spent on my PhD.
